DOCS-5334-4.2-Build-application-from-api-kt (#894)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/pages/build-application-from-api.adoc

= Build an Application from an API Specification
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:keywords: build, application, api, specification

During your app development lifecycle, you can build Mule REST or SOAP APIs from an API specification using APIkit.  You develop APIs based on the following modeling languages:

* RAML (RESTful API Modeling Language)
* WSDL (Web Service Description Language)
* OData (OData-Enabled APIs using APIkit OData Extension)
* OAS (Open API Specification)

> By using APIkit in Anypoint Studio, you can simplify the design and implementation of APIs by automating Mule flows creation based on importing either a RAML, or WSDL specification file. After generating the API, you can perform calls to test the API and then finalize its implementation. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using APIkit in Anypoint Studio, you can simplify the design and implementation of APIs by automating Mule flow creation based on importing either a RAML or a WSDL specification file. After generating the API, you can perform calls to test the API and then finalize its implementation. +
```

> Additionally, APIkit helps you build applications using Apache Maven, and also provides a CLI tool to generate flows for an already existing application, but before you jump into the workflows of building an application using APIkit, learn the basic APIkit anatomy and understand the scaffolding technique that generates Mule flows when you start APIkit projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, APIkit helps you build applications using Apache Maven, and also provides a CLI tool to generate flows for an already existing application. However, before you perform any of these tasks, you must learn basic APIkit architecture and understand the scaffolding technique that generates Mule flows when you start APIkit projects.
```

> == APIkit Anatomy

Reviewer: I think you want "architecture" instead of "anatomy"?
Oh.
I see that MuleSoft has been using the term "anatomy." Hmm...can you check with your team? Look them up in a dictionary (Webster's is best) and see what you think.

Reviewer: But...is the following text about APIkit architecture or about the architecture of REST and SOAP Studio projects that use APIkit? We might need to tweak this title.

> A REST or SOAP project that uses APIkit has the following parts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A REST or SOAP Studio project that uses APIkit has the following parts:
```

> * A RAML or WSDL interface.

Reviewer: Why does this list item name RAML and WSDL but the subtopics are titled for REST and SOAP?
The list item and the subtopics should use the same terms.

Reviewer: No period;
```suggestion
* A RAML or WSDL interface
```

* A main flow
* Backend flows

.REST Studio Project.
image::mruntime-rest-studio-project.png[REST Studio Project]

.SOAP Studio Project.
image::mruntime-soap-studio-project.png[SOAP Studio Project]

==== REST Interface

> The relationship between REST resources and actions is called resource-action pairing. The interface exposes internal data assets requested by the REST service. Also, defines the API, designating resources that contain or access data and specify actions, such as GET and PUT, on the example data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The relationship between REST resources and actions is called _resource-action pairing_. The interface exposes internal data assets requested by the REST service. Also, the interface defines the API, designating resources that contain or access data and specify actions, such as GET and PUT, on the example data.
```

Reviewer: I guessed that the thing "defining" is the interface, yes? Please re-read to verify that I have not inadvertently changed your intended meaning (always a good practice!).

==== SOAP Interface

> The interface defined by a WSDL file exposes a number of services. Each service has a set of operations. The underlying type of data is XML defined by schemas within the WSDL file or by an imported XSD file.

Reviewer: "a number of" is pretty vague: do we really mean "a few" or "several"?

=== Main Flow

> The main flow for these APIs manages these functions:

Reviewer: "these APIs" = which APIs? Do we mean "an" API or "the" API, rather than some specific APIs?

> * Exposes the API using HTTP Connector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Exposes the API using Anypoint Connector for HTTP (HTTP Connector).
```

* Routes requests between the interface and the backend flows based on the HTTP request.
* Accepts requests, sends responses, and facilitates communication between the interface and API processes.

> The main flow consists of HTTP Listener and APIkit (REST or SOAP) Router components. The APIkit Router is a key message processor that validates requests against the provided definition, enriches messages, for example by adding default values to the messages, and routes requests to a particular flow. Also the Router raises different errors messages in case of any error while routing/validating/processing the user request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main flow consists of HTTP Listener and APIkit (REST or SOAP) Router components. The APIkit Router is a key message processor that validates requests against the provided definition, enriches messages (for example, by adding default values to the messages), and routes requests to a particular flow. Also, the Router raises error messages if errors occur while routing, validating, or processing the user request.
```

.REST API Main Flow.
image::mruntime-rest-main-flow.png[REST API Main Flow]

.SOAP API Main Flow.
image::mruntime-soap-main-flow.png[SOAP API Main Flow]

=== Backend Flows
APIkit for REST generates a backend flow for each resource-action pairing in a RAML file. +
APIkit for SOAP generates a backend flow for each operation in a WSDL. +

> In the following example, the RAML interface receives the GET request users. The backend flow accesses a database to look up users by id.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, the RAML interface receives the GET request users. The backend flow accesses a database to look up users by ID.
```

Reviewer: "...interface receives the GET request users" : I'm not sure what it means for an interface to "receive users"?
Are we saying that the interface receives GET requests from different users, and that the backend flow is able to identify the users by looking them up in a database? So...the interface receives requests FROM users who are identified by the backend?

.REST API Backend Flows.
image::mruntime-rest-backend-flows.png[REST API Backend Flows]

=== Perform Calls

> For REST APIs, use the API Console to perform calls to the API. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For REST APIs, use API Console to perform calls to the API. +
```

> For SOAP APIs, use a SOAP testing tool such as SoapUI, to perform calls to the API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For SOAP APIs, use a SOAP testing tool such as SoapUI to perform calls to the API.
```

== Start APIkit Project and Generate Mule Flows

> When you create an APIkit project in Studio, you have the option to whether import or not an API definition file and and when you do so, the APIkit scaffolding technique generates different flows for the API. There are three ways to start an APIkit project:

Reviewer: Do each of the following three subtopics address both STARTING the project and GENERATING flows?
If not, reword to precisely introduce them.

Reviewer: I think that maybe we want to say here something simpler: maybe just that there are three ways to start an APIkit project (and generate Mule flows?), and then name them:

```suggestion
There are three ways to start an APIkit project in Anypoint Studio: 
* Create a new project that uses an existing API definition file (known as _APIkit scaffolding_)
* Create a new project that uses placeholder RAML and XML configuration files
* Create a new project by generating backend flows
```

Reviewer: Are we using "start an API project" to mean the same thing as "create a new project"? 
Choose the most precise--start or create--and use it only, if so.

Reviewer: Also, I am guessing that users will choose one of these three methods based on some custom criteria. Under what specific circumstances would a user choose one method over the others? Can we state that here? Or maybe we can start each subtopic with something like "Use this method if..."?

=== Start a New APIkit Project with an API Definition File

> Create a project importing a RAML or WSDL file, or reference the file URL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One method of [creating/starting] a new APIkit project is by either importing an existing RAML or WSDL file or by referencing the file URL:
```

. Select *File > New > Mule Project*.

> . In *Project Name*, enter a name for the project, for example *myproject*. Select or accept the default EE Runtime, for example *Mule Server 4.2.0 EE*.

Reviewer: Each step should be one distinct user action or group of related actions (like the selection flow in Step 1). So, for Step 2, divide the existing step into two steps:

```suggestion
. In *Project Name*, enter a name for the project: for example *myproject*. 
. Select or accept the default EE Runtime: for example *Mule Server 4.2.0 EE*.
```
QUESTION: does a user select the default or accept it? And what is an "EE Runtime," and should it really be capitalized?

> . In *API Implementation*, check *Specify API Definition File Location or URL*.

Reviewer: check > select
(I assume that this is a checkbox? We use "select." See style ref.)

. In *Location*, do one of the following:

> * Select *Design Center* if you created an `api.raml` file in Design Center. Login to Anypoint Platform if necessary, and select `api.raml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you created a RAML file in Design Center, log in to Anypoint Platform, if necessary, and select *`api.raml'*. 
```

> * Alternatively, if you didn’t create the RAML in Design Center, select *Browse Files*. Browse to and select the RAML or WSDL file that you created in a text editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you didn’t create a RAML file in Design Center, select *Browse Files* and select the RAML or WSDL file that you created using a text editor.
For a WSDL file, select a service and port from the drop-down menus or accept the defaults.
```

> * For WSDL files, select a service and port from the drop-down menus or accept the defaults.

Reviewer: omit
This should not be a separate bullet list item, if it belongs with the previous.

[start=5]
. Accept the Location default options, and click *Finish*.

.New Mule Project window selecting API specification .
image::mruntime-start-apikit-project-1.png[New Mule Project with API Specification selected]

> The APIkit scaffolding technique generates:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using this APIkit scaffolding technique generates:
```

> * An archetype that contains basic configuration files plus a Mule XML configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An archetype that contains basic configuration files plus a Mule XML configuration file
```
no period

> * An implementation of the API that contains:

Reviewer: Because we want to avoid nesting list items beyond two levels unless we absolutely must, I suggest this change:
```suggestion
*For RAML-based APIs (`src/main/resources/api`), an implementation of the API that contains:
**A main flow with an HTTP Listener
**The APIkit Router component
**Error handlers
**RAML dependencies (push or pull changes from one location, such as Studio, to another, such as Design Center)
**Backend flows containing REST resource-action mappings
```

Reviewer: Can we omit the list item about where the RAML file appears? It is not parallel with the other list items.

** For RAML-based APIs:
*** The RAML file appears under the `src/main/resources/api` folder.
*** A main flow with an HTTP Listener.
*** APIkit Router component.
*** Error handlers.
*** RAML dependencies, push or pull changes from one location, such as Studio, to the other, such as Design Center.
*** Backend flows containing REST resource-action mappings.

> ** For WSDL-based APIs:

Reviewer: Repeat the same format here:
```suggestion
* For WSDL-based APIs (`src/main/resources/api`), an implementation of the API that contains:
**A SOAP router
**A SOAP fault-response template
**Backend flows containing SOAP message templates
```

Reviewer: ditto re. (`src/main/resources/api`)

*** The WSDL file appears under the `src/main/resources/api` folder.
*** A SOAP Router.
*** A SOAP fault response template.

> *** Backend flows containing SOAP message templates.

Reviewer: See above

> The below graphics explain the APIkit scaffolding technique:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following graphics illustrate APIkit scaffolding:
```

.RAML Scaffolding.
image::mruntime-raml-scaffolding.png[RAML Scaffolding]

.WSDL Scaffolding.
image::mruntime-wsdl-scaffolding.png[WSDL Scaffolding]

In Studio, the REST API APIkit project looks like this:

.REST API in Anypoint Studio UI with the Package Explorer and Canvas sections.
image::mruntime-rest-api-studio-apikit.png[REST API Anypoint Studio UI with the Package Explorer and Canvas sections]

> * The first item shows the project files in the Package Explorer of Studio with the `api.raml` file under src/main/resources/api folder.

Reviewer: This bullet list does not have an introduction. How about something like this:

"The five items illustrated here show:"
```suggestion
. The project files in the Package Explorer of Studio, with the `api.raml` file under src/main/resources/api folder.
```
...using a number list? The same for the next items.

* The second item displays the main flow with the APIkit Router.
* The third item displays the APIkit Console.
* The fourth item displays the Error Handling.
* The fifth item display generated flows for each resource method. The generated minimal flows meets the communication operations required by a REST contract.

> 

Reviewer: . The main flow, with the APIkit Router.
.APIkit Console
.Error handling
.Generated flows for each resource method
The generated minimal flow meets the communication operations required by a REST contract.

In Studio, the SOAP API APIkit project looks like this:

.SOAP API in Anypoint Studio UI with the Package Explorer and Canvas sections.
image::mruntime-soap-api-studio-apikit.png[SOAP API Anypoint Studio UI with the Package Explorer and Canvas sections]

* The first item shows the project files in the Package Explorer of Studio with the `example.wsdl` file under src/main/resources/api folder.
* The second item displays the main flow with the SOAP Router.
* The third item displays the SOAP fault response template.

> * The fourth item display generated backend flows containing SOAP message templates.

Reviewer: ditto same treatment as suggested for the previous list, with the introduction added

> Once you create your APIkit project, you can then continue building the application by simulating calls to test the API and finalize its implementation. See <<Build Applications Workflows>> for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you create your APIkit project, you can continue building the application by simulating calls to test the API and finalize its implementation. See <<Build Applications Workflows>> for details.
```

=== Start a New APIkit Project

> In Studio, if you create a new APIkit project and do not specify an API definition file, APIkit generates a skeletal RAML file and XML configuration file. Later, you can add an API specification and test the API with the API Console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Studio, if you create a new APIkit project and do not specify an API definition file, APIkit generates a skeletal RAML file and XML configuration file. You can later add an API specification and test the API with API Console.
```

. Select *File > New > Mule Project*.

> . In *Project Name*, enter a name for the project, for example *myproject*. Select or accept the default EE . Runtime, for example *Mule Server 4.2.0 EE*.

Reviewer: ditto prev edit to this same text earlier in this file:
```suggestion
. In *Project Name*, enter a name for the project: for example, *myproject*. 
. Select or accept the default EE Runtime: for example, *Mule Server 4.2.0 EE*.
```
See also earlier question about "EE Runtime."

> . In *API Implementation*,  do _not_ check *Specify API Definition File Location or URL*. This creates the backend-first APIkit design.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In *API Implementation*,  do _not_ select *Specify API Definition File Location or URL*. 
This creates the backend-first APIkit design.
```

. Accept the other default options, and click *Finish*.

.New Mule Project window.
image::mruntime-start-apikit-project-2.png[New Mule Project window without API specification]

> The APIkit scaffolding generates a skeletal RAML file and XML configuration file that includes the following components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
APIkit scaffolding generates a skeletal RAML file and XML configuration file that includes the following components:
```

* A main flow <flow name="main-api"></flow>
* HTTP Listener configuration in the main flow
* APIkit Router component
* Error handlers

> Later, you can add an API specification to the backend-first APIkit design and generate backend flows to continue building the application. See <<Build Applications Workflows>> for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can later add an API specification to the backend-first APIkit design and generate backend flows to continue building the application. See <<Build Applications Workflows>> for details.
```

=== Start a New APIkit Project by Generating Backend Flows

> This procedure assumes you previously:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To perform this task, you must have met the following prerequisites:
```

> 

Reviewer: No periods at the ends of the following two list items

* Created a RAML file in Studio (RAML editor).
* Created a main flow with an HTTP Listener and APIkit Router components.

> When you create a RAML in Studio, generating backend flows is optional. Error handling is generated for a RAML-based API. You need to reference generated flows from the main flow. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you create a RAML file in Studio, generating backend flows is optional. Error handling is automatically generated for a RAML-based API; however, you must reference generated flows from the main flow. +
```
VERIFY my suggested addition of "automatically".

> To generate backend flows:

Reviewer: Why are we documenting an optional task? Under what circumstances would a user want to perform this, if it is done automatically? Clarify.

> . In the Package Explorer, right-click the project name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In Package Explorer, right-click the project name.
```

. Select *Mule > Generate Flows From REST API*.

.Generating backend flows from Mule Project.
image::mruntime-start-apikit-project-3.png[Generating backend flows from Mule Project]

> The APIkit scaffolding technique generates the backend flows below the main flow, you can then continue building the application by simulating calls to test the API and finalize its implementation. See <<Build Applications Workflows>> for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The APIkit scaffolding technique generates the backend flows following the main flow. You can then continue building the application by simulating calls to test the API and finalize its implementation. See <<Build Applications Workflows>> for details.
```
"automatically"?

== Build Applications Workflows

> Once you are familiarized with the basic APIkit anatomy and scaffolding technique, review the following workflows that help you build your desired application, from creating the APIkit project, generating Mule flows, simulating calls to the API and finalizing its implementation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you are familiar with basic APIkit anatomy and the scaffolding technique, examine the following workflows to help you build your desired application by creating the APIkit project, generating Mule flows, simulating calls to the API, and finalizing its implementation:
```

* xref:apikit::apikit-4-generate-workflow.adoc[Build a REST API using APIKit for REST]
* xref:apikit::apikit-4-for-soap.adoc[Build a SOAP API using APKit for SOAP]

Additionally, you can:

> * xref:apikit::apikit-workflow-convert-existing.adoc[Convert an Existing Mule Project to an APIkit Project]: add an API specification to an existing APIkit backend-first design, define API definition files, create main flow,  generate backend REST API flows, map RAML resources to actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:apikit::apikit-workflow-convert-existing.adoc[Convert an existing Mule project to an APIkit project]
Add an API specification to an existing APIkit backend-first design, define API definition files, create the main flow, generate backend REST API flows, and map RAML resources to actions.
```

> * xref:apikit::apikit-4-tasks-index.adoc[APIkit 4.x Tasks]: Change APIkit project, customize API console, configure headers, retrieve RAML files, execute nonfunctional requirements, configure load balancers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:apikit::apikit-4-tasks-index.adoc[Perform APIkit 4.x tasks]
Change an APIkit project, customize API Console, configure headers, retrieve RAML files, execute nonfunctional requirements, and configure load balancers.
```

> * xref:apikit::creating-an-odata-api-with-apikit.adoc[Create Enable O-Data API using APIkit OData Extension]: generate Mule flows to handle OData requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:apikit::creating-an-odata-api-with-apikit.adoc[Create an Enable O-Data API using the APIkit OData extension]
Generate Mule flows to handle OData requests.
```

> * xref:apikit::creating-an-apikit-4-project-with-maven.adoc[Creating an APIkit Project with Maven]: add APIkit components to an existing Apache Maven project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:apikit::creating-an-apikit-4-project-with-maven.adoc[Create an APIkit project with Maven]
Add APIkit components to an existing Apache Maven project.
```

> == Consume Data from an API

Reviewer: This topic is not part of the set, because it addresses the next big task.
I suggest removing this subtitle, or maybe changing it to Next Steps?

= Build an Application from an API Specification
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:keywords: build, application, api, specification

During your app development lifecycle, you can build Mule REST or SOAP APIs from an API specification using APIkit.  You develop APIs based on the following modeling languages:

* RAML (RESTful API Modeling Language)
* WSDL (Web Service Description Language)

> * OData-Enabled APIs using APIkit OData Extension

Reviewer 2: missing OAS

Author: Updated.

> * OData-Enabled APIs using APIkit OData Extension

Reviewer 2: also `OData-Enabled APIs using APIkit OData Extension`  -> OData

Author: Updated.

By using APIkit in Anypoint Studio, you can simplify the design and implementation of APIs by automating Mule flows creation based on importing either a RAML, or WSDL specification file. After generating the API, you can simulate calls to test the API and then finalize its implementation. +

> Additionally, APIkit helps you build applications using Apache Maven, but before you jump into the workflows of building an application using APIkit, learn the basic APIkit anatomy and understand the scaffolding technique that generates Mule flows when you start APIkit projects.

Reviewer 2: Additionally, APIkit helps you build applications using Apache Maven,   ->  APIKit also provide a CLI tool to generate flows for an already existing application.

Author: Updated.

[NOTE]

> MuleSoft recommends Design Center for creating and syncing RAML code; however, Anypoint Studio includes a RAML editor that provides syntax validation and suggestions if you want to perform the entire development within Studio.

Reviewer 2: > Anypoint Studio includes a RAML editor that provides syntax validation and suggestions if you want to perform the entire development within Studio. 

I would probably ommit this since the RAML editor is being deprecated.

Author: Removed.

== APIkit Anatomy
A REST or SOAP project that uses APIkit has the following parts:

* A RAML or WSDL interface.
* A main flow
* Backend flows

.REST Studio Project.
image::mruntime-rest-studio-project.png[REST Studio Project]

.SOAP Studio Project.
image::mruntime-soap-studio-project.png[SOAP Studio Project]

=== API Interface

> The interface defines the API, designating resources that contain or access data and specify actions, such as GET and PUT, on the example data

Reviewer 2: > The interface defines the API, designating resources that contain or access data and specify actions, such as GET and PUT, on the example data

this only apply to rest

Author: Updated.

==== REST Interface
The relationship between REST resources and actions is called resource-action pairing. The interface exposes internal data assets requested by the REST service.

==== SOAP Interface
The interface defined by a WSDL file exposes a number of services. Each service has a set of operations. The underlying type of data is XML defined by schemas within the WSDL file or by an imported XSD file.

=== Main Flow
The main flow for these APIs manages these functions:

> * Exposes the API using HTTP or Jetty.

Reviewer 2: Exposes the API using the HTTP connector

Author: Updated.

* Routes requests between the interface and the backend flows based on the HTTP request.
* Accepts requests, sends responses, and facilitates communication between the interface and API processes.

> For REST APIs the api-main flow consists of HTTP Listener and APIkit Router components. The APIkit router is a key message processor that validates requests against the RAML definition, enriches messages, for example by adding default values to the messages, and routes requests to a flow. "Bad request" is returned if the request is invalid, for example, and "Not implemented" is returned if the RAML resource that you request is not associated with a flow.

Reviewer 2: `For REST APIs` 

remove, this apply to both (SOAP and REST)

Author: Updated

.REST API Main Flow.
image::mruntime-rest-main-flow.png[REST API Main Flow]

> For SOAP APIs the main-api flow consists of HTTP Listener and SOAP Router components.  Based on a WSDL file, the SOAP Router component routes arriving calls to the corresponding flow depending on the resource and method.

Reviewer 2: image is from rest but here you are talking about soap

Author: Updated.

> .REST API Main Flow.

Reviewer 2: same tittle here than above

image::mruntime-soap-main-flow.png[SOAP API Main Flow]

=== Backend Flows
APIkit for REST generates a backend flow for each resource-action pairing in a RAML file. +
APIkit for SOAP generates a backend flow for each operation in a WSDL. +
In the following example, the RAML interface receives the GET request users. The backend flow accesses a database to look up users by id.

.REST API Backend Flows.
image::mruntime-rest-backend-flows.png[REST API Backend Flows]

> === Simulating Calls

Reviewer 2: Simulating Calls -> perform calls

Author: Updated.

For REST APIs, use the API Console to simulate calls to the API. +

> For SOAP APIs, use a SOAP testing tool such as SoapUI, to simulate calls to the API.

Reviewer 2: to simulate calls to the API. -> they are real calls

Author: Updated.

* For WSDL files, select a service and port from the drop-down menus or accept the defaults.

[start=5]
. Accept the Location default options, and click *Finish*.

.New Mule Project window selecting API specification .
image::mruntime-start-apikit-project-1.png[New Mule Project with API Specification selected]

The APIkit scaffolding technique generates:

* An archetype that contains basic configuration files plus a Mule XML configuration file.
* An implementation of the API that contains:
** For RAML-based APIs:
*** The RAML file appears under the `src/main/resources/api` folder.
*** A main flow with an HTTP Listener.
*** APIkit Router component.
*** Error handlers.
*** RAML dependencies, push or pull changes from one location, such as Studio, to the other, such as Design Center.
*** Backend flows containing REST resource-action mappings.
** For WSDL-based APIs:
*** The WSDL file appears under the `src/main/resources/api` folder.
*** A SOAP Router.
*** A SOAP fault response template.
*** Backend flows containing SOAP message templates.

The below graphics explain the APIkit scaffolding technique:

.RAML Scaffolding.

> image::mruntime-raml-scaffolding.png[RAML Scaffolding]

Reviewer 2: all this is going to chance since studio 7.4.0 GA on decembeer, if you can track this would be great 

cc @martincousido

Author: Yes, I'll track it. Thanks for the heads up.
